ONE HOMEOWNER'S RESPONSE TO BILL PARKER'S LETTER
Dear Mr. Parker:
I would like to thank you for taking the time to write Serrano homeowners, expressing your opinion about what is happening in our association. No doubt that opinion is influenced by reports that you receive from the employees to whom you have delegated the task of dealing with our association, homeowners your staff have appointed to the board through developer votes and Mr. Bowmen.
Allow me to share with you what is happening as seen from the perspective of a homeowner who has lived in Serrano since 2002. Although I agree with you on several points made in your letter, I do not agree with many others. As with your letter, my missive too will be lengthy because I wish to cover the salient points comprehensively.
Considering many factors that have come to light over the past few years I am not sure that Mr. Bowman’s departure is the loss that you have articulated. There are many problems with our association and the General Manager has to bear the responsibility when an organization is not running properly. Association accounting practices immediately come to mind.
I do hope that Mr. Bowman has been hiring experienced, qualified employees. I understand that he hires employees without obtaining board approval and based on the responses he has given to homeowners at board meetings, we have cause for concern.
I do not know who is responsible for the combative culture endemic to Association staff. Is it Mr. Bowman, the PDC employees on our board, the homeowner/directors your staff has appointed to the board or from a higher source in the food chain? The unspoken rule is that the homeowners MUST be kept in line. The focus is to enforce every little rule to the letter. They have not been trained to understand that homeowners are customers who pay their salaries. That culture creates strife and homeowners are frequently on edge when they have to deal with staff members. My read on Mr. Bowman is that he is a good soldier who does exactly what he has been told by the PDC faction. It is difficult to believe that he is responsible but he does have the title and the ultimate responsibility. The cost of and need to record calls that staff receives from homeowners’ telegraphs the fact that altercations are expected and being planned for. The existing dynamic is counterproductive and needs immediate correction. Perhaps a management change will accomplish just that.
You bemoan the loss of the Association’s controller, an employee for 10-years, and imply that Messrs. Getz and Thompson are responsible for his departure. My understanding is that he accepted the position of General Manager with the Parkway Owner’s Association. One would have expected you to be aware of that fact; is he not still operating under the Parker umbrella. Apparently under the present leadership, Association employees are not expected to advance their careers. No doubt Serrano homeowners would wish him well. I think your using his departure as an argument to manipulate Serrano homeowners into supporting your cause is unconscionable.
Until about two years ago homeowner attendance at the monthly board meetings was almost nonexistent. I did attend a few board meetings during the first decade I lived here and learned very quickly that board members were arrogant, self-serving and dismissive of homeowner comments and concerns. Little or nothing ever got done and the good ol’ boy network was humming along at full power. Note that those boards consisted of PDC employees, staff members of various builders and only the occasional homeowner. The motto during those years should have been, “delay, deflect and obfuscate.”
During one meeting that I attended about eighteen months ago, a board member asked a question of a homeowner, a person that I had never seen before. The question was how another association, that homeowner had been a board member for, handled the issue under discussion. When the homeowner answered, Tom Howard, board member and PDC employee, made a snide comment causing a couple of other board members to snicker in response. The homeowner was insulted and made sure that Mr. Howard was aware of that fact. I am sure that Tom Howard would be pleased to learn that his unbridled arrogance may very well be the reason that Robert Thompson ran for and was elected to our current board.
In response to your concern that Messrs. Getz and Thompson have committed to shake up the status quo, I have to say, GOD I HOPE SO! A shake up is ten-years overdue. Since their inclusion on the board, homeowners are treated with more respect during meetings. Meetings are now being videotaped and the recordings are available for viewing by homeowners on the association web site. Homeowner concerns are receiving consideration and more homeowners are participating in meetings. So the pattern and practice of “Mushroom Management” inflicted by past boards is already being ameliorated.
Homeowner apathy is still a problem here in Serrano. Although I have no data to back it up, I suspect that is a common condition in planned developments around the country. Homeowners tend to focus on running their lives and unless there are issues that negatively impact the status quo; they are not going to be bothered by association issues. Thanks to the inclusion of Messrs. Getz and Thompson homeowners can now see a light at the end of the tunnel. We can now hope to have control over our own destiny. Attendance at board meetings is higher than it has ever been and as more homeowners get involved it is going to be more difficult to continue on the same old path exhibited for decades.
While I can see the need to draft developer staff members to sit on the board in the early years in the lifespan of an association, Serrano must certainly have reached maturity by now when homeowners can replace PDC staff members and appointees on the board. Isn’t it time to see if the fledgling can fly on its own? After all, you yourself stated that our association is “strong and self-sustaining.” I question the prudence of continuing to have PDC employees on the board at this stage of our development. A major concern is that when the interests of PDC and our association diverge there is no question where the loyalties of the PDC employees lie. This seems to be happening more frequently as time passes. The result is the possibility of their not properly meeting their fiduciary responsibilities as board members. Even when that is not the case the dynamic of the current arrangement gives cause for concern and severely strains the level of trust homeowners have in their actions.
Resistance to change is a common trait in the human animal. We all react to it in different ways but the one constant in life is change. It is easy for you to state that you hope that we will return to in-house security. You have no skin in the game. When the board made the change they were meeting their fiduciary responsibilities. This change came with a significant cost savings. I have no doubt that if you were paying the security costs you would have a different opinion, especially with respect to the reduced exposure to litigation that the change provides.
Because our outsourcing involved the termination of employees, our legal counsel advised the board not to allow a discussion with the general homeowner population. That recommendation has not been well received by homeowners.
Unfortunately, association staff has demonstrated an inability to quantify the costs savings resulting from the interim change to Paladin. They prepared a grossly inaccurate cost savings analysis and mailed it to homeowners without first obtaining board approval. Then Mr. Bowman e-mailed the board an admission that the data provided was inaccurate. Mr. Bowman explained during a later board meeting that the activity under discussion took place on a Friday afternoon. It seems that going home on time that Friday was more important than producing accurate data for the board! That is not what I would categorize as an “award winning” management performance, something that I never would have accepted from any of my managers during my management career.
In your letter you mentioned property values. It would be interesting to learn how many Serrano homeowners came from out of the area and how many moved from neighboring towns. I can tell you that when I was an active Realtor© in the county many of the potential buyers from our immediate area wanted nothing to do with listings in Serrano. The stigma of the way our association’s “award winning” management treats homeowners, in exchange for attractive landscaping, is more responsible for keeping property values down than a disagreement between board members. I am confident that once developer influence is removed from our association and homeowners gain control, property values will increase.
In a new development I understand that the Bureau of Real Estate seems to be supporting Mr. Getz’s position on some of our Association’s creative accounting issues and have issued a cease and desist order to our Association. That appears to fly in the face of your contention that his allegations are false. It looks like our Association had better start cleaning up our act. Could additional BRE scrutiny have an impact on PDC’s future activities?
Your letter gives the impression that you would like to see Messrs. Getz and Thompson removed from our board. My response is that I would like to see Mr. Bone, Ms. Phemester and Detective Payne removed from the board and replaced with homeowners who have no allegiance to PDC and are dedicated solely to the interests of homeowners.
Sincerely,
Mike West
